# Distance-Calculation-of-Property-Crimes
R code detailing the importing, cleaning and manipulation of property crime data, and the subsequent distance calculations from a secondary file of police station locations. Distance calculations determine which police station is the closest and add the information to the file for further statistical modelling for an Honors Thesis Research.

The Project itself was an investigation in the rationality of criminals, a topic which is subject of a debate within the fields of economics and criminology. 

Much of the literature in these fields investigates whether criminals are rational in their illicit activities, truley considering and/or weighting the risks vs rewards. While economical literature focuses on the marginal benefits and opportunity cost of each crime option to the offender, criminological literature concentrates on an offender's perception and interaction of external stimuli (physical environment, socioeconomic background, presence of law enforcement personnel, etc). However, despite the differences between the two fields' approach to modelling criminal behavior, both agree recessions and other market downturns lead to increases in the overall crime rate, as individuals seek to make ends meet during these times of economic burden. 

My research investigated whether the spatial location of a crime would be affected by a down economy, exploring whether criminals would approach their crimes more rationally, or subcumb to the pressure and commit a less-than-optimal crime. To measure this rationality (and any variations in it), I examined the average distance of a crime to the nearest police station. For the obvious risks invovled, a criminal would not seek to burglarize a business near a police precinct and would thus commit the act some distance away from a police station. By measuring the average distance to the nearest police station, the rationality (or lack thereof) could be gauged. 

The R code for this project imports the datasets used for the crimes and police station locations in the city (the crime data set used was obtained from the City of Chicago's Open Data portal, while the Police Precinct locations were obtained through contacting Chicago Police's crime modelling department) and cleans the set to include only property crimes. Although violent crimes such as murder were included in the original dataset, much criminological literature notes the lack of rationality or premediation, and would be more apt to be explored in a more psychological/criminological paper than the current project. 

The distance calculations themselves use the Haversine Formula to determine the great-circle distance between two points on a sphere given their longitudes and latitudes. This formula was run via a for loop against each property crime in the sample to find this distance. Within the for loop is a secondary loop that runs the calculation against each police station, so the nearest police station with the smallest value, could be definitively found before logging this data to the file. Code used for a particular year of the project is included both as a .R file and a .txt file.

After building a econometric model with the data, my research found that among property crimes, Burglary and Criminal Tresspassing actually experience an increase in the distance to the nearest police station as the economy grows worse. This is fitting with prior research which indicates that Burglars approach crime in a more rational manner than that of a Robber, as Burglary is defined by the unlawful entering of a property for the illicit appropriation of another's property, while Robbery involves the same goal, only achieved through violence, theats and/or intimidation. 
Criminal Treaspassing is congruent with this perspective as Burglaries are often preceeded by an offender performing reconnaissance or "scoping out" the target before the actual crime. Crime types other than Burglary and Tresspassing were found to have no measurable relationship between economic conditions and the distance, which implies that as these crimes are approached in a less-than-rational manner by some offenders, while others attempt some form of forethought of their actions. 



